# Customer-Behviour-Analysis using Python , SQL and PowerBI
## Project Overview
This project analyzes customer shopping behavior using transactional data from 3,900 purchases across various product categories. The goal is to uncover insights into spending patterns, customer segments, product preferences, and subscription behavior to guide strategic business decisions.
## Tools:
✅**Data Preparation,Modeling & Exploratory Data Analysis (Python)**: Clean and transform the raw dataset for analysis.

✅ **Data Analysis (SQL)**: Simulate business transactions, and run queries to extract insights on customer segments, loyalty, and purchase drivers.

✅ **Visualization & Insights (Power BI)**: Build an interactive dashboard that highlights key patterns and trends, enabling stakeholders to make data-driven decisions.

✅ **Report and Presentation:** A clear project report summarizing the key findings and business recommendations. Preparing a presentation that visually communicates insights and actionable recommendations to stakeholders.

## WorkFlow:
### 1.Data Preparation in Python:
* **Data Loading:** Imported the dataset using pandas.
* **Initial Exploration:** Used df.info() to check structure and .describe() for
summary statistics.
* **Missing Data Handling:** Checked for null values and imputed missing values in the
Review Rating column using the median rating of each product category.
* **Created a new Age group column:** It labels the ages into 4 categories:
```python
labels = ['Young Adult', 'Adult', 'Middle-aged', 'Senior']
df['age_group'] = pd.qcut(df['age'], q=4, labels = labels)
````
* **Created purchase_frequency_days column:** Using the values from purchase data.
```python
frequency_mapping = {
    'Fortnightly': 14,
    'Weekly': 7,
    'Monthly': 30,
    'Quarterly': 90,
    'Bi-Weekly': 14,
    'Annually': 365,
    'Every 3 Months': 90
}

df['purchase_frequency_days'] = df['frequency_of_purchases'].map(frequency_mapping)
```
* **Data Consistency Check:** Verified if discount_applied and promo_code_used
were redundant; dropped promo_code_used.
* **Database Integration:** Connected Python script to PostgreSQL and loaded the cleaned
DataFrame into the database for SQL analysis.

### Data Analysis using SQL (Business Transactions)
* **Revenue by Gender** – Compared total revenue generated by male vs. female
customers.
* **High-Spending Discount Users** – Identified customers who used discounts but still
spent above the average purchase amount.
* **Top 5 Products by Rating** – Found products with the highest average review ratings.
* **Shipping Type Comparison** – Compared average purchase amounts between
Standard and Express shipping.
* **Subscribers vs. Non-Subscribers** – Compared average spend and total revenue
across subscription status.
* **Discount-Dependent Products** – Identified 5 products with the highest percentage of
discounted purchases.
* **Customer Segmentation** – Classified customers into New, Returning, and Loyal
segments based on purchase history.
* **Top 3 Products per Category** – Listed the most purchased products within each
category.
* **Repeat Buyers & Subscriptions** – Checked whether customers with >5 purchases are
more likely to subscribe.
* **Revenue by Age Group** – Calculated total revenue contribution of each age group.

### Dashboard in Power BI
An interactive dashboard was built that allows one to see different visuals allowing filtering options like:
* **Subsription status**
* **Gender**
* **Category**
* **Shipping Type**
  





